---
title: Dreams on Hold
image: >-
  https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1502904550040-7534597429ae?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=3649&q=80
author: content/authors/jen.md
preface: >-
  So far the year 2020 has been and will continue to be a year unlike any that we have ever seen before. I [think](https://example.com) that aside from the obvious of everything being turned upside down, cancelled, or postponed - there are some __great__ opportunities ahead for us if only we take a moment to think it through and look at it with the right perspective.
_template: post
---

#### A New Twist on Base Training

So far the year 2020 has been and will continue to be a year unlike any that
we have ever seen before. I think that aside from the obvious of everything
being turned upside down, cancelled, or postponed - there are some great
opportunities ahead for us if only we take a moment to think it through and
look at it with the right perspective.

It is now almost October and the end of summer ushers in shorter days, crisper
mornings and a season that many of us as runners hold dear. It is the season
that most would say is their favorite time of the year to be out running. The
stifling heat has finally subsided and there is not a chance of snow in the
immediate future. Ok so maybe the last part doesn’t relate to everyone, but
you get the point. The fall is just that special time when putting in more
miles feels a whole lot easier. It is no wonder that this is when we all feel
a special calling to go back to our roots - to just go out and run for the
pure enjoyment of it. This opportunity we have right now to engage with nature
and embrace our surroundings should be a calling we need now more than ever.

Doesn’t it make sense why all the 10ks, half marathons and marathons usually
take place over these next few months? It is so much more inviting to just
keep running when the weather makes you feel like you can go forever. However,
not that it is my goal here to return us back to reality, but it is 2020 and
races have gone virtual or been pushed to another time and space. So what
should we do? Do we put in our fall base training in hopes of something
magical happening soon? I think we tried that one back in April & May and we
all know how that ended up. Instead I think we need a new approach to how we
look at base training so that we can enjoy the fruits of its labor even more.

The first thing that we need to do is look closely at what the word “base”
actually means in relation to running. Of course, when we talk about a base we
imply building a foundation, but need that foundation only be related to
running through lots of long and slow miles as has for so many years prior? I
think not. If we look a little closer we will see that there are so many more
foundations that we can build upon at this time of year. We need to create the
building blocks now for our speed work, our intervals, our tempo work and
everything in between. All of them can help us to be a better runner -
regardless of whether there is another race to run in the next month or the
next year.

Personally, I have always thought of my running in the fall as both a chance
to start things over and a chance to start something new. By getting into the
fall season I have often used it to shed away the past and to forge ahead
towards a new goal. To accomplish this I realized that this time of year
wasn’t just about hitting the repeat button, but about adding something more.
So as I logged the miles I came to understand that this time wasn’t just about
running many slow miles, it was about coming to a better understanding of how
all of those miles work. I realize that the “Fall Foundation” was indeed a
time to build out everything from the ground up. This is not only where I put
in the foundation for my long runs, but also for my short & fast ones as well.
Let me tell you from experience - it is equally as hard to be effective at
sprinting when you haven’t done your homework as it is to go out for that 20
miler when you haven’t taken the necessary steps along the way. Our
foundations are everything and so we need to look at all the ones we can use
to make our running more complete.

Where to start? Let’s first look at how fast you normally run and how fast you
want to run. If you have a goal of running faster than it won’t be
accomplished by just running more miles or willing yourself to run faster than
before. We need to build the base. So we start with just a mile per week -
that’s all I ask as a start. Do one mile broken up into any segments you can
handle and run your goal 1 mile pace for those intervals. Just get the speed
in and have it be a total of 1 mile of volume by the end of the week. You can
even break it up over 2 or 3 days in the week if you like. After that we
increase the volume and then in the following weeks we add in other race
paces.

What you will come to see is that as you are adding in these faster paces week
by week you are also getting faster in a lot of your regular training runs.
Running these faster intervals each week has now made it easier to run your
traditional fall training miles because you have improved your running
economy. You have built the base for getting your entire body (heart, lungs,
nervous system and all the working muscles) on the same page. Each system has
been challenged, trained and tuned up in a way that it now all works in
harmony. This is a type of training that I call the “Outside In” approach. We
start with both the long, slow runs as well as the short, fast ones
simultaneously. Once developed we continue to work our way in from both ends
over the next few months until we finally get to race pace. Approaching fall
training in this fashion keeps the body in balance. It is quite a bit
different than the classical training approach, but I have found it to be much
more effective.

When you look at your Fall Foundation training in this light you will come to
see that from here you are ready for anything. If a mile pops up on the
calendar then you can do it and actually expect to run fast. If a 5k comes to
happen, whether it be virtual or live, don’t be surprised if you run a PR.
What about the marathon? Come on now… logging those fall miles has always been
about the long races. Piece of cake. Now you have your choice of distances to
choose from with a fall training program like this one. I would think that it
is nice to have a few more knowns with your running in such a time of
unknowns. Give it a try and let me know how it goes.
